docs(70): SQL spec for 1.0 (#71)
clockworklabs/spacetime-docs: docs/sql/index.md

> # SQL Support

Author: Note, I deleted this file and replaced it with a new one for an easier to review diff. I'm not sure if this will render. I will rename back to `index.md` before merging.

| `inventory_id`             | Refers to a column.                                     |
| `"inventory_id"`           | Refers to the same column.                              |
| `"inventory.inventory_id"` | Refers to the same column, explicitly naming its table. |

#### Wildcards

Special "star" expressions which select all the columns of a table.

| Example       | Description                                             |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| `*`           | Refers to all columns of a table identified by context. |
| `inventory.*` | Refers to all columns of the `inventory` table.         |

#### Parenthesized expressions

Sub-expressions can be enclosed in parentheses for grouping and to override operator precedence.

| Example       | Description             |
| ------------- | ----------------------- |
| `1 + (2 / 3)` | One plus a fraction.    |
| `(1 + 2) / 3` | A sum divided by three. |

### `CREATE TABLE`

A `CREATE TABLE` statement creates a new, initially empty table in the database.

The syntax of the `CREATE TABLE` statement is:

> **CREATE TABLE** _table_name_ (_column_name_ _data_type_, ...);

> ![create-table](/images/syntax/create_table.svg)

Author: Images point to the [spacetime-web](https://github.com/clockworklabs/spacetime-web) repo. Which means they don't render here.

and `ON` determines which combinations are considered.

> NOTE: Joining more than two tables will be supported in the future.

> IMPORTANT: If a `JOIN` is used,
> an index **must** be defined on the join columns of both tables,
> so that it can be evaluated efficiently.

### WHERE

```ebnf
predicate
    = expr
    | predicate AND predicate
    | predicate OR  predicate
    ;

expr
    = literal
    | column
    | expr op expr
    ;

op
    = '='
    | '<'
    | '>'
    | '<' '='
    | '>' '='
    | '!' '='
    | '<' '>'
    ;

literal
    = INTEGER
    | STRING
    | HEX
    | TRUE
    | FALSE
    ;
```

While the `SELECT` clause determines the table,
the `WHERE` clause determines the rows in the subscription.

```sql
-- Which items in my inventory have been purchased and are more than $X?
SELECT item
FROM Inventory item
JOIN Orders order
ON item.item_id = order.item_id
WHERE item.price > {X}

-- Which items in my inventory have been purchased and are less than $Y?
SELECT item
FROM Inventory item
JOIN Orders order
ON item.item_id = order.item_id
WHERE item.price < {Y}
```

> NOTE: Arithmetic expressions will be supported in the future.

## Query and DML

### Statements

> - [SELECT](#select)

Reviewer: I don't think this link goes where you want it to; I believe it will find the first `#select` anchor, which is the above one about subscriptions, not the below one about one-off queries.

- [INSERT](#insert)
- [DELETE](#delete)
- [UPDATE](#update)
- [SET](#set)
- [SHOW](#show)

### SELECT

```ebnf
SELECT projection FROM relation [ WHERE predicate ]
```

The query languge is a strict superset of the subscription language.
The main differences are seen in column projections and joins.

> The subscription api only supports wildcard projections,

Reviewer: If we're going to talk about "wildcard projections" this much, I think we should define that term somewhere. It would also be nice to say *why* subscriptions only support wildcard queries.

but the query api supports individual column projections.

The subscription api limits the number of tables you can join,
and enforces index constraints on the join columns,

> but the query language has no such constraints or limitations.

Reviewer: This could use an example too. Show me a 3-way join, or something.

#### SELECT Clause

```ebnf
projection
    = '*'
    | table '.' '*'
    | projExpr { ',' projExpr }
    ;

projExpr
    = column [ [ AS ] alias ]
    ;
```

The `SELECT` clause determines the columns that are returned.

Examples:
```sql
-- Select the items in my inventory
SELECT * FROM Inventory;

-- Select the names of the items in my inventory

> SELECT item_name FROM Inventory

Reviewer: Can you add an example that selects more than one but fewer than `*` columns?

```

#### FROM Clause

```ebnf

> FROM table [ [AS] alias ] { [INNER] JOIN table [ [AS] alias ] ON predicate }

Reviewer: I get that `JOIN` is grammatically a child of `FROM`, but I wonder if we should give it a separate section. We have to devote a lot of text to what joins we do and don't support, and I expect we'll want to link directly to that.

Author: Logically it's part the `FROM` clause, so I've kept it like that, but I've added links to the appropriate section whenever I mention joins.

```

Examples:
```sql
-- Which orders include currently stocked items?
SELECT order.*
FROM Orders order
JOIN Inventory inv
ON order.item_id = inv.item_id
```

#### WHERE Clause

See [Subscriptions](#where).

### INSERT

```ebnf
INSERT INTO table [ '(' column { ',' column } ')' ] VALUES '(' literal { ',' literal } ')'
```

Examples:
```sql
-- Inserting one row
INSERT INTO Inventory (item_id, item_name) VALUES (1, 'health1');

-- Inserting two rows
INSERT INTO Inventory (item_id, item_name) VALUES (1, 'health1'), (2, 'health2');
```

### DELETE

```ebnf

> DELETE FROM table [ WHERE predicate ]

Reviewer: Do we allow joins as filters in deletes?

Author: No we do not. The grammar is explicit about this, but I have also added text to clarify.

```

Deletes all rows from a table.
If `WHERE` is specified, only the matching rows are deleted.

Examples:
```sql
-- Delete all rows
DELETE FROM Inventory;

-- Delete all rows with a specific item_id
DELETE FROM Inventory WHERE item_id = 1;
```

### UPDATE

```ebnf

> UPDATE table SET [ '(' assignment { ',' assignment } ')' ] [ WHERE predicate ]

Reviewer: Same question re: joins.

```

Updates column values of existing rows in a table.
The columns are identified by the `assignment` defined as `column '=' literal`.
The column values are updated for all rows that match the `WHERE` condition.
The rows are updated after the `WHERE` condition is evaluated for all rows.

Examples:
```sql
-- Update the item_name for all rows with a specific item_id
UPDATE Inventory SET item_name = 'new name' WHERE item_id = 1;
```

### SET

> > WARNING: This statement is not part of the stable API.

Reviewer: Can we say "Support for the `SET` statement is experimental" instead? The appeal to "the stable API" reads weird to me.

> Its compatibility with future versions of SpacetimeDB is not guaranteed.

```ebnf
SET var ( TO | '=' ) literal
```

Updates the value of a system variable.

### SHOW

> > WARNING: This statement is not part of the stable API.

Reviewer: Again, "the stable API" feels like a silly thing to say. There's no platonic "stable API" sitting in the realm of ideas.

> Its compatibility with future versions of SpacetimeDB is not guaranteed.

```ebnf
SHOW var
```

Returns the value of a system variable.

## System Variables

> > WARNING: System variables are not part of the stable API.

Reviewer: ibid

> Their compatibility with future versions of SpacetimeDB is not guaranteed.

- `row_limit`

    ```sql
    -- Reject queries that scan more than 10K rows
    SET row_limit = 10000
    ```

## Data types

The data types that SpacetimeDB supports is defined by [SATS],
the Spacetime Algebraic Type System.

Spacetime SQL however does not support all of [SATS],
specifically in the way of product and sum types.
The language itself does not provide a way to construct them,
nore does it provide any scalar operators for them.
Nevertheless rows containing them can be returned to clients.

## Literals

```ebnf
literal = INTEGER | FLOAT | STRING | HEX | TRUE | FALSE ;
```

> The following describes how to construct literal values,
> for [SATS] data types, in Spacetime SQL.

Reviewer: Is `[SATS]` a meaningful link? I don't think it particularly adds value to this sentence, either way.

```suggestion
The following describes how to construct literal values of various data types in Spacetime SQL.
```

Author: The link is not meaningful, but it is important to specify the type system under which these values are interpreted. For instance, it could be expected that numeric values have arbitrary precision which they do not.

### Booleans

Booleans are represented using the canonical atoms `true` or `false`.

### Integers

```ebnf
INTEGER
    = [ '+' | '-' ] NUM
    | [ '+' | '-' ] NUM 'E' [ '+' | '-' ] NUM
    ;

NUM
    = DIGIT { DIGIT }
    ;

DIGIT
    = 0..9
    ;
```

> > NOTE: The concrete [SATS] type is inferred from the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concrete integer type is inferred from the context.
```

I don't think this needs special highlighting.

### Floats

```ebnf
FLOAT
    = [ '+' | '-' ] [ NUM ] '.' NUM
    | [ '+' | '-' ] [ NUM ] '.' NUM 'E' [ '+' | '-' ] NUM
    ;
```

> > NOTE: The concrete [SATS] type is inferred from the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concrete floating-point type is inferred from the context.
```

### Strings

```ebnf
STRING
    = "'" { "''" | CHAR } "'"
    ;
```

`CHAR` is defined as a `utf-8` encoded unicode character.

### Hex

```ebnf
HEX
    = 'X' "'" { HEXIT } "'"
    | '0' 'x' { HEXIT }
    ;

HEXIT
    = DIGIT | a..f | A..F
    ;
```

Hex literals can represent [Identity], [Address], or binary types.
The type is ultimately inferred from the context.

## Identifiers

```ebnf
identifier
    = LATIN { LATIN | DIGIT | '_' }
    | '"' { '""' | CHAR } '"'
    ;

LATIN
    = a..z | A..Z
    ;
```

Identifiers are tokens that identify database objects like tables or columns.

> Spacetime SQL supports both quoted and unquoted identifiers.

Reviewer: What's the difference between a quoted and an unquoted identifier? When would I use one or the other?

> > NOTE: Both types of identifiers are case sensitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both types of identifiers are case sensitive.
```

```ebnf
table
    = identifier
    ;

alias
    = identifier
    ;

var
    = identifier
    ;

column
    = identifier
    | identifier '.' identifier
    ;
```

[sdk]:       /docs/sdks/rust/index.md#subscribe-to-queries
[http]:      /docs/http/database#databasesqlname_or_address-post
[websocket]: /docs/ws/index.md#subscribe

> [sats]:     /docs/satn.md

Reviewer: Oh, you're sending `[SATS]` to the poorly-named `satn.md`, which describes our JSON encoding. I do not think that's a good idea.

Author: Yes, this was originally just a placeholder, but we still don't have a doc that describes the type system apart from a specific encoding. I removed the link for now, but ideally we would like to link to that reference doc.

Since the subscription api is purely a replication api,
a query may only return rows from a single table,
and it must return the entire row.
Individual column projections are not allowed.

A `*` projection is allowed when the table is unambiguous,
otherwise it must be qualified with the appropriate table name.

#### Examples

```sql
-- Subscribe to all rows of a table
SELECT * FROM Inventory

-- Qualify the `*` projection with the table
SELECT item.* from Inventory item

-- Subscribe to all customers who have orders totaling more than $1000
SELECT customer.*
FROM Customers customer JOIN Orders o ON customer.id = o.customer_id
WHERE o.amount > 1000

-- INVALID: Must return `Customers` or `Orders`, but not both
SELECT *
FROM Customers customer JOIN Orders o ON customer.id = o.customer_id
WHERE o.amount > 1000
```

### FROM

```ebnf
FROM table [ [AS] alias ] [ [INNER] JOIN table [ [AS] alias ] ON column '=' column ]
```

While you can only subscribe to rows from a single table,
you may reference two tables in the `FROM` clause using a `JOIN`.
A `JOIN` selects all combinations of rows from its input tables,
and `ON` determines which combinations are considered.

> Subscriptions do not yet support joins of more than two tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscriptions do not support joins of more than two tables.
```

> Note that for any column referenced in `ON` clause of a `JOIN`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any column referenced in `ON` clause of a `JOIN`,
```

it must be qualified with the appropriate table name or alias.

> Also note that in order for a `JOIN` to be evaluated efficiently,

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In order for a `JOIN` to be evaluated efficiently,
```

While the `SELECT` clause determines the table,
the `WHERE` clause determines the rows in the subscription.

> > NOTE: Arithmetic expressions are not yet supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arithmetic expressions are not supported.
```

Deletes all rows from a table.
If `WHERE` is specified, only the matching rows are deleted.

> > NOTE: `DELETE` does not support joins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DELETE` does not support joins.
```

The column values are updated for all rows that match the `WHERE` condition.
The rows are updated after the `WHERE` condition is evaluated for all rows.

> > NOTE: `UPDATE` does not support joins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`UPDATE` does not support joins.
```

## Data types

> The data types that SpacetimeDB supports is defined by SATS,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data types that SpacetimeDB supports are defined by SATS,
```

Or possibly, "The set of data types [...] is defined [...]"

```

The following describes how to construct literal values,

> for SATS data types, in Spacetime SQL.

Reviewer: Commas aren't necessary here - "for SATS data types" is not a subordinate clause. GH won't let me suggest, but should be:

```
The following describes how to construct literal values for SATS data types in Spacetime SQL.
```

```ebnf
INTEGER
    = [ '+' | '-' ] NUM

>     | [ '+' | '-' ] NUM 'E' [ '+' ] NUM

Reviewer: Wait, we support scientific notation integers? I didn't notice this the first time through, but... huh.

Author: https://github.com/clockworklabs/SpacetimeDB/pull/2196
